---
title: 天动
date: 2023-01-10
author: bosonicli
tags:
-   Ether
---

[toc]

每日，黄道面在天球上绕地轴(北极星)方向旋转

# Sun Path

This blog needs vevival into `Jupyter` in the future

In this blog we discuss how does the sun path seen from ground in a day changes with season.

When someone looks up at daytime, he will find the sun hanging up in the sky in some 'position'. In winter the sun goes lower and in summer the sun goes higher. It is always important to find a way to describe the sun 'position' and its relation with time, from thousands of years ago.

The longitude / latitude of this looking up guy is on earth sphere, and so are the north / south pole, the equator, and the longitude / latitude coordinate system. The sun is a bit far away, but its light can be regarded as almost parallel when they reached our earth. Thus, we can assume that everything related to this problem happenes on a unit earth sphere and also a unit hypothetical 'celestial sphere'.

We denote the earth center as \\( O \\), an axis perpendicular to the ecliptic passes \\( O \\) and intersect with the earth sphere at \\( M \\), the earth north pole is \\( N \\) and \\( O/M/N \\) forms a plane that we call 'Axis plane' here. The axis plane intersects with the ecliptic at point \\( P \\) on the earth sphere, which should be the direct sun point at summer solstice. Time has passed since the summer solstice so the sunlight direction shifts for angle \\( \theta_{0} \\). The new direct sun point is now \\( S \\).

We have now \\( \angle MON = \phi_{0} = 23.44^{\circ} \\), and \\( \angle NOP = \frac{\pi}{2} - \phi_{0} \\) , \\( \angle NPS = \frac{\pi}{2} \\) , \\( \angle POS = \theta_{0} \\)

Thus, on the earth sphere coordinate system, \\( \angle NOS / \angle PNS \\) is the longitude / 'latitude' of direct sun point, respectively. Using spherical trigonology it can be easily deduced that

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \phi_{S} &= \angle NOS = cos^{-1}( sin \phi_{0} cos \theta_{0} )  \\
    \theta_{S} &= \angle PNS = cos^{-1}( \frac{ cos \phi_{0} cos \theta_{0} }{ \sqrt{ 1 - sin^{2} \phi_{0} cos^{2} \theta_{0} } } )
\end{aligned}
$$

Consider an observer \\( I \\) on earth at latitude \\( \phi_{I} \\) and 'longitude' \\( \theta_{I} \\), the 'longitude' here is not the real longitude but time distance to noon, a.k.a. longitude distance to \\( P \\). Now that the observer and the effective 'sun on the celestial sphere' is on the same sphere, it can be easily deduced (using spherical trigonology) that

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \angle NIS &= cos^{-1}( \frac{ sin \phi_{I} cos \phi_{S} + sin \phi_{S} cos( \theta_{I} - \theta_{S} ) }{ \sqrt{ 1-( cos \phi_{I} cos \phi_{S} + sin \phi_{I} sin \phi_{S} cos( \theta_{I} - \theta_{S} ) )^{2} } } )   \\
    \frac{ IS }{ sin( \angle INS ) } &= \frac{ NS }{ sin( NIS ) }   \\
    IS &= \phi_{S} \frac{ sin ( \theta_{I} - \theta_{S} ) }{ \sqrt{ 1-cos^{2}( \angle NIS ) } }
\end{aligned}
$$

\\( \pi - \angle NIS \\) is the 'direction' and \\( \frac{\pi}{2} - IS \\) is the 'height' of the sun with respect to the observer, thus we get the sun 'position'
